[Sandi] This week
it's the quarter-finals.
[exhales heavily]
[Sandi] Danish week.
[both groaning]
[groans]
-[Sandi] A Scandi Signature...
-Ouch!
-[Sandi] A tricky technical.
-The whole thing is burnt.
[Sandi] And a great Danish showstopper,
culminating in a Viking onslaught.
[all] Ahhh!
[Paul] This is just burnt.
You left it in the oven too long.
I don't deserve to be here any more.
Oh, God!
[Sandi] As the bakers battle
for a place in the semi-finals.
[crying]
[tearfully] That was a bit brutal.
[theme music playing]
Hey listen,
thanks for getting the costumes.
I just want everything
to be perfect for you.
I’ve even come up with some jokes.
-Oh, yeah? Okay.
-Danish jokes.
-Why did the Viking buy an old boat?
-I don't know.
-‘Cause he could afford a new one.
-No, he couldn't "a fjord" a new one.
[chuckles] That’s even better.
-How do Vikings send messages?
-I don't know.
-Morse Code.
-No, Norse Code.
That is fantastic.
Go on, say it’s Danish Week in Danish.
[speaking Danish]
-Brilliant. How do you even do that?
-I just speak.
I love that beard.
What a week to lose your tweezers.
[Sandi] It’s week eight
and only five bakers remain.
In tribute to John who left last week,
the bakers have decided to leave their
Viking wear behind,
and don Hawaiian shirts.
It’s the blooming quarter-finals.
Let’s do this. Game on. Come on.
I think Kim-Joy.
She’s the baker to beat.
She’s a dark horse.
So yeah, little cute Kim-Joy.
She’s, like, uh, "I’m gonna
make you the best cake ever."
I’m all prepared, yeah.
There could be a Scandi drama.
[laughs]
What do I know about Danish baking? Um...
I’ve never done Danish baking before.
I think... is crowshaw, crowshaw’s Danish?
-[interviewer] Kosher?
-Croshants?
-[interviewer] Croissants?
-Croissants?
Hi Bakers. Wow, look at you.
Did not get the memo about this week.
Like a Beach Boys convention.
[all laughing]
It’s Danish Week.
-Yes!
-Now, for your Signature challenge today,
the judges would love you to bake
a rye bread and from it create
two perfectly executed,
delicious open sandwiches.
They’re called "smørrebrød."
Open sandwiches, which must
be presented alongside your rye loaf.
The judges would like you to make your own
personal rye bread recipe,
but, you know, you'd better be good.
You have three and a half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
Bage.
[timer beeps]
[Sandi] The traditional Danish rye
bread used for smørrebrød
is dark and dense and takes
24 hours to create.
The bakers must be inventive to produce
a loaf with a similar texture and flavour.
So one of my really good friends,
she’s Danish.
Like, it’s one of the hardest language
because you have to, er,
you know, make your throat
like smørrebrød, smørrebrød.
Smørrebrook. Smørrebook.
When I say that I sound
like I’m trying to be Welsh.
Smørrebrød.
Now, basically what it is,
it’s an open sandwich.
The base of the open sandwich is rye.
Lots and lots of seeds in it.
On top of which, strong flavours.
Normally pickled or smoked. Big hitters.
[voice quivers nervously]
I think the trick is beauty
combined with simplicity.
It must be a little work of art
on a small piece of very thin rye bread.
-[Paul] This is the quarter-finals now.
-[exhales]
Any problems, I’ll be on them.
-Good morning, Rahul.
-Good morning.
So it’s quarter-finals, Rahul.
Oh, I don't want to think about that.
I’m just thinking it’s a normal week.
Well, we want to know
about your open sandwiches.
There’s going to be one with smoked salmon
and I’m going to serve it with remoulade.
-Okay.
-Basically a carrot, celeriac and, uh,
shallots, chopped up really nicely and
then reduced down in the pickling liqueur
with a little bit of curry powder,
mix it with mayonnaise.
And then I’m going to
pickle some cucumber as well,
and then lemon and a few asparagus
leaves and some dill leaves.
I’m gonna make some home-made cheese
and do pickled style candied beetroot,
some golden beetroot and normal beetroot,
and then I’m just going
to arrange it on the top.
Your time’s up now you’ve described that.
Sorry?
[Noel] Somewhere under all the
Home-made toppings,
Rahul is attempting to pull off
a traditional dense and seedy rye bread,
which takes the Danes 24 hours to produce.
See, you see, this is what happens.
Think it’s just getting there.
Sandwiches have names
so you ought to name your sandwiches.
Yeah, mine’s really boring at the minute.
There’s a very famous sandwich shop, uh,
where they have a sandwich
named after my father.
-So there’s a Claus Toksvig sandwich.
-No way.
Yeah. How cool is that? So you could have,
you know, the Hollywood, uh, sandwich...
Or no, okay. No, you don't want that.
[Sandi] Ruby would rather name her
smørrebrød after a treadmill than Paul.
Inspired by her favourite post-gym snacks,
she’s creating a Mediterranean breakfast
and a tandoori chicken lunch.
Her base will be a lightly
seeded rye bread.
How much flour?
What’s the weight of flour?
Uh, I’ve gone 200 for each.
-Water. How much water?
-250...
-250?
-...millilitres of water. Yeah.
Eh, uh, no other liquid in there at all?
250 to 400?
Oh, God, why? That’s just how I practised.
Should I put more in?
-Okay.
-What? Why? What should I have...
-What would have gone for?
-I’m not gonna tell you, am I?
[Noel] Making one rye
bread is tricky enough...
It’s like super-duper sticky.
[Noel] ...but to stand out
from the rest,
Briony has taken a massive risk
by attempting two doughs.
You get, you know, the usual nausea
that kicks in about now.
The blind fear of having to bake bread
for Paul Hollywood. You know, standard.
[Sandi] Briony’s out to impress by
marbling her dark and light doughs
into a decorative loaf.
She’s spanning the EU for her
Danish sandwich toppings
with a Spanish meat feast on one
and a West Country platter on the other.
It’s all about the display for me on this.
Yeah, absolutely. Well they’re both gonna
look like, um, little gardens.
The chorizo and the Ibérico
will be in little flowers.
This is Briony the artist.
I’m gonna have a tomato swan.
-A tomato swan?
-Yeah, you wait.
-I’m in.
-Okay. All right.
Thank you very much.
It’s not terrifying at all having
to knead in front of Paul Hollywood.
Timing’s critical. So there’s no more
time to knead. Need to prove it.
[Noel] Rye dough
can be tricky to prove.
The bakers must judge time
and temperature precisely.
Right. Rise, my little pretty.
[Sandi] Too much and the bread
will lost its tight rye texture.
Under-prove,
and it will be dense and stodgy.
Normally I don't put in the proving dryer.
It’s 30 degrees now.
Think I will just reduce it slightly.
We're gonna start cooking.
We got sweet potato, we got normal potato.
We got fig jam, we got beetroot smoking.
It’s all happening. It’s all happening.
[Noel] All the bakers have chosen savoury
toppings, some more than others.
So just making some cheese,
as if I’m not mad enough.
[Sandi] But Manon is adding
a little sweetness to her smørrebrød.
It’s just mascarpone and gorgonzola.
In France, we don't actually
eat cheese with sweet stuff.
I’m really excited about these flavours
because it’s so cheesy and creamy.
[sing-song] Delicious.
Mmm. Mmm.
[Noel] If there’s any left, Manon’s cheese
fest will be married with fresh fruit.
She’s taking a punt on a light rye bread
and instead of using a traditional tin,
she’s relying on her trusty saucepan
for an artisan crust.
It’s not going in a tin,
it’s just going in that pan?
Yeah. So it’s round.
Uh, when you put it in the pan,
does it actually reach the sides?
No.
-It doesn't?
-No.
-It just sits in the middle?
-Yes.
Any problems with the dough
being slightly raw in the middle?
Uh, so that’s why this is good,
and also I tried to do it in the tin
and it would not cook.
Oh, ha-ha, that's... Yes.
That... If I saw those...
-Yeah.
-...it would be all over.
-Swan, swan tomatoes.
-You gonna make a radish goose?
-You’re gonna leave it...
-Not today, not today. Maybe tomorrow.
Leave it at swan tomatoes.
I wonder what Paul will make of them?
I know. I think he’s gonna...
‘Cause he loves decoration, small animals.
-And he loves girly...
-Girly stuff.
Yeah, I mean,
it’s his favourite thing ever, right?
He’s in his trailer now. Actually as I was
coming here I saw... I just peeked in
through the window, and he was in a tutu
and he was doing a sort of really weird
drawing of a unicorn.
And then he pretended... He sort of...
When he saw me he threw away
the unicorn picture and he picked up
a car magazine.
These are boiling. I’ll just give,
‘cause they’ve got 26 seconds.
I want them to be hard-boiled because
they’ve gotta turn into bumblebees.
So they can’t be soft-boiled bees.
[Sandi] Kim-Joy’s delicate boiled egg bees
will buzz amongst cheese flowers,
and an intricate cucumber and radish fish
will swim above a seabed
of wholemeal sourdough.
So that’s actually got quite a good rise.
For a wholemeal bread,
I’m quite happy with that.
It’s done all right.
It’s been about just under double I think.
Oh, yeah. That’ll do nicely.
I’m just gonna knock it back.
Oh, dear me. This is just not right.
My bread doesn't rise at all.
Did yours rise?
Did you put it in...
Yeah but I have a lot of bread flour.
-Oh, my God!
-Do you want to give him a little tip?
Just like rolling it up gives it
a good oven space,
especially for this kind of shape.
[Briony] I’m marbling my loaf, so
I’m putting together the two doughs.
Beautiful.
-Hmm, it’s not good.
-What’s the matter?
I decided to put quite a lot of rye in it.
Yes, it’s rye bread.
I know but rye bread needs
lots of time to prove.
Who’s gonna announce my name? Last week...
Uh, oh, it will be Noel.
Last week Jon did, so this is Noel.
Yeah.
It’ll be Noel.
Yeah, Noel has to say goodbye to you.
-Yeah. Noel will probably have to.
-I’ll go get him ready.
Okay. Yes.
Looking good.
[Noel] The bakers will need to gauge
when their loaves are just baked through.
I hope it’s beautiful.
[Noel] If they remove it too soon
their bread will be doughy.
Too long, and the rye will be dry.
So, it’s gonna go for half an hour.
[moans] I can’t really do anything now.
I’ve done my timings and it leaves me
with about 25 minutes to cool
and about 15 minutes
to put the toppings on.
I need half an hour to cool...ish.
I can bake it for half an hour.
That means three hours.
Yeah, I just have to... No... Yeah.
I don't really have much time.
Oldest flag in the world.
-Really? That one there?
-Danish, yes. No, not this specific...
Bakers, you have one hour left!
Bakers loaves are in the hands
of the oven gods.
[Rahul] Oh, dear.
[Sandi] In a matter of minutes
they’ll discover
if their prove will prove
too much or too little.
It’s about that much.
Ooh, that looks good.
That looks really nice.
Yeah, it looks a bit different
than the one I do at home.
Oh, dear me.
Hmm. I’m happy.
[Ruby] Right, so the rise isn’t actually
as much I originally hoped.
It’s actually quite small. It’ll be fine.
[Manon] So now I’m gonna let it cool.
[exhales]
How are you? Are you doubting yourself?
I’ve got a baby loaf compared
to everyone else’s.
A baby loaf?
Yes. It’s quite small.
I’ve not... I’m not used this...
-How small?
-About that and it’s not as, um...
Why don't you say it’s in the distance?
Kim-Joy, Ruby and Manon have allowed
their bread crucial cooling time.
I just hope they’re not gonna say
it doesn't look like a rye bread.
[Noel] But Briony and Rahul
are playing a dangerous game.
They’ll have to cut their loaves
when they’re still baking hot,
which will make cutting
a thin slice extremely tricky.
I think I have to take it out now.
It’s just not ready yet.
It’s going to crumble down
because I don't have time to cool now.
[sighs]
Come on.
That looks good. Hot. Hot. Hot. Hot.
But good, good, good.
Bakers, you have 15 minutes,
just 15 minutes.
Showtime.
My slices are quite thin but I thought
that’s what... Yeah, you know what,
I’m going with what I’m going with.
[Sandi] In record time the bakers
will need to work out how to transform
their Danish rye into an exquisite
open sandwich.
[Briony] I’m going to do these
and then I’m gonna cut.
Think it’s just not cooked enough.
Like, how do you make a sandwich
look good? I just wanna eat it.
[Kim-Joy] I love a salmon sandwich.
So that’s goat cheese.
Bakers, you have five minutes,
just five minutes.
Oh, what I’m doing?
It’s probably a little bit thicker then
I was going for,
but it’s going to be a bit
of a doorstop sandwich.
[Rahul] This is a home-made cheese I made.
[Ruby] How do you get this stuff
to look nice?
[Kim-Joy] He has got a big stinger.
[Manon] Oh.
This is like a layer of roasted butternut
squash. Where did I put my salad?
[Briony] Let’s get the swans on.
Oh. Oh no, my swans! Oh, my little swans.
You know, they’ve looked better.
Bakers, you have one minute,
just one minute.
[Rahul] Oh, well.
[Ruby] Stop falling off.
[Kim-Joy] [gasps] Ah!
[Briony] Let’s get these on.
[Ruby] Oh, my hand is actually shaking.
[Kim-Joy] Just worried that the egg
bumblebees look a bit dried out now.
There we go.
[sighs heavily]
That is the end. You are out of time.
[exhales]
[Sandi] The bakers’ smørrebrød face
quarter-final judging by Prue and Paul.
-Hello, Ruby.
-Hello.
-Hi.
Oh, God.
That’s how thin it should be
and that actually is the right structure.
-That is nice.
-Hmm.
Well done. That’s what I expect.
I think that’s a very good colour.
So that’s tandoori chicken and some raita
is sitting on the bottom
and some cucumber ribbons.
I think the flavour of that’s good.
I think it works together as a sandwich.
Okay.
Very well-balanced.
There is a little bit of chilli there.
-Yeah.
-I like it all.
This is the avocado on there as well?
Yes, um, avocado, asparagus,
chorizo and quails eggs.
It’s a real celebration of rye,
particularly in that one.
Good.
It’s very good. It’s like the
Mediterranean meets Denmark. Thank you.
-[Prue] Well done.
-God, I’m sweating.
[Paul] I’d like to have seen
more colour in that.
[Manon] Okay. Inside, yeah?
Um, and more dense and filled
with seeds preferably.
-Yeah.
-Right.
So we have goat cheese with
roasted beetroots,
some strawberries, some glazed vinegar.
The flavour of your rye is not strong.
Also I think it lacks savouriness.
It’s so sweet.
Okay, sweet. Uh-huh.
It almost needs seasoning, doesn't it?
-Otherwise it’s just like um, pudding.
-Cheesy.
The chutney, the walnut, the cheese,
as a sandwich, it’s great.
But as a Danish open sandwich?
Do you know what bread that is?
Pain de campagne.
-Oh really?
-Yeah, you’ve made a French loaf.
You’ve definitely got a rye in there
and it is baked well.
Okay.
And this is a very
beautiful looking texture.
I hope it tastes as good as that.
[Paul]
They are beautiful looking sandwiches.
Flavours are good.
I can really taste the rye.
[Paul] I think
the dill makes it authentic
and so does the fish,
the avocado and the capers.
I just... It just needs to be
a little bit stiffer,
more seeds and I think you would have been
nearly there, to be honest.
Yeah, it was all right. It’s fine.
-Can you imagine Prue...
-Yes.
...walking into a, uh,
little coffee shop...
-Is that Prue’s walking?
-Is that how she walks?
-That’s her walk. She walks in and says...
-Yes.
"Excuse me,
would you mind making a sandwich?"
So... And you turn round
and give her that.
Yeah. Yeah? To be honest with you,
I just... Yeah,
I appreciate they’re too big.
I do apologise on that front, yes.
I know, okay. They’re too big.
Let’s try and judge them anyway.
[Paul] What is this?
Chorizo, Ibérico ham and sweet potato
with a fig jam.
I tasted the white rye by itself
and it doesn't taste much of rye.
Right, okay.
It’s more like a malted loaf than a rye.
Okay.
This is even more difficult to...
It's like building my own sandwich here.
I would have thought the smoked mackerel
would have been perfect
but it’s quite dry.
Oh, okay.
It’s not rye enough,
it’s not dense enough,
it’s not at all like an open sandwich
bread. So you’re in another challenge.
[Paul] It’s a shame.
It just gone really soggy.
It’s so dense
it’s almost like a cake there.
There’s no air holes in it at all.
But it does look, to be honest, Rahul,
a bit of a mess.
Yeah.
Um, oh, dear.
Oh, no.
Not for me, mate. The bread’s awful.
It’s like it’s turning back into
a dough in my mouth.
Paul is right, it’s...
-Very stodgy.
-...very heavy and gluey.
It was the proving and you know that.
Yeah. I knew that it was the proving.
Actually that reminds me of a flavour
of a sandwich I had in Copenhagen.
I’m avoiding eating the bread because
I don't think it’s entirely edible.
I think you just did too much.
You tried too hard.
[whispering] It’s okay, baby.
They’re really harsh today.
That’s not a bad, is it? A real
celebration of rye. Cheers for that, Paul,
on a rye bread challenge.
I mean, what more could I want?
It just shows how bad it is that Paul
do not eat the bread because it’s so bad.
Yeah, it was not my best.
So I’m middle but middle
below kind of thing.
If I think that I felt like my comments
were the worst, I think I’d be crying.
[crying] That was a bit brutal.
That was harsh, yeah.
Get back up. Get back on it.
That’s just who I am.
[Sandi] For the first challenge the bakers
could practice as much as they liked,
but they’re going into
this second one blind.
Right. Bakers, welcome back
to the Technical challenge,
which today has been set for you by Paul.
Although I’m pretty sure he got the idea
from my house, just saying.
Uh, Paul, any advice?
There’s a technique in this recipe you’re
gonna have to learn and learn quickly.
-Oh, wow.
-[Sandi] Right, thank you very much.
Off we go.
Now, for your Technical challenge today,
Paul/Sandi, would like you to make
14 Danish Æbleskiver.
Your 14 Æbleskiver need to be perfect
with a distinctive spherical shape.
Your Æbleskiver must be filled
with cinnamon spiced apple
and served with a strawberry jam
dipping sauce.
You have one hour for your challenge.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
Bake.
Okay. Ooh. This looks fun.
So I actually know what they are.
Have I heard of these before? No.
Have I seen them before? No.
[Prue] Paul, why Æbleskiver?
I’ve never had one and I’ve never made one
and I think they sound
incredibly difficult.
The best way to show you what an
Æbleskiver is, is cut one open.
So what you have
is an aerated dough inside,
and then you have this pocket
of apple and cinnamon.
You want these beautiful, smooth,
spherical pancakes, if you like.
It’s a lovely, light batter, isn’t it?
-Oh, yeah.
-Oh, it’s delicious
This is the tricky bit. They’ve all got
these metal plates with indentations,
like semicircles. What you’ve gotta do
is pour this batter mixture in.
Once you see the edges firming up,
you’ve gotta rotate it.
Once you rotate, you end up with a hole
in the middle
and this is where
you put your apple and cinnamon.
Then you finally rotate
and the batter covers that.
Sounds hugely difficult.
I just hope for their sake
that they are cooked
‘cause Sandi’s gonna kick off big time.
[Noel] Before making
the all-important batter,
the bakers have two elements to rustle up.
-What you doing now? Jam sugar.
-I’m just making the apple...
What’s that? Looks like baby sick.
[Noel] A delicious apple and cinnamon
filling and strawberry preserve.
How does that even work?
A jam dipping sauce.
Get it up to 105 degrees
is generally the best thing to do.
Briony’s using a thermometer in her jam.
Actually, she’s taken hers off.
I’m gonna take mine off
and leave it to cool now.
"For the batter, whisk the egg whites
and sugar together."
It’s not the same as a pancake you’d have
on pancake day, like,
it’s got buttermilk in it.
That’s a bit posh.
I think I’m looking for
a nice smooth consistency,
something that’s not too sloppy.
You happy with this?
I’ve actually seen it before...
You’ve seen it before?
...’cause my sister dated
a Danish guy for, like, two years.
-Your sister dated a Danish dude.
-Yeah.
Sounds like a porn star, I’m not gonna
lie, and he made this? So you’ve seen it?
Yeah. Yeah, I’ve seen it before.
-This is yours.
-Yeah, we'll see.
Don't wanna knock out too much
of the air that I’ve just whisked in.
I’m gonna guess it needs
to be nice and smooth.
[Rahul] I’m not very good
with time constraints.
Bakers, you have half an hour left.
-Okay, I better get moving.
-I’m gonna go for it now.
Oh, my God, that’s heavy.
Just greasing these balls.
I don't really know what I’m doing.
It just says, "Spoon the batter into the
holes until they are three quarters full."
Is that three quarters full?
Is that too full?
I’m just gonna start and learn as I go.
"Cook until the edges begin to firm."
"Begin to firm."
So it’s not letting it cook fully.
"Turn the Æbleskiver 90 degrees
using two wooden skewers."
Oh, it says 90 degrees.
Is 90 degrees like that?
Turning 90 degrees.
-So what does it mean turn it 90 degrees?
-What does it... What do you think?
Turning, so I guess like that?
But that’s 180 degrees, innit?
What does "turn" means?
Ooh. Ooh. Ooh. Ooh.
Right, so you go like that.
Spoon a little of the spiced apple into
the hole in the batter
and then turn it another
90 degrees to close.
Really don't know how I’m meant
to be doing this but...
Oh, okay.
But there’s no bloody hole to put the
thing in. Oh, these are not going well.
Wow, that’s hard. Okay.
Wow, look, a little pancake.
Yeah, I mean, it’s a little spherical
pancake with apple stuff inside.
Uh-oh. Very thick, isn’t it?
It’s not good at all.
Well, I don't actually
have that much batter.
This is going to be
quite challenging, guys.
I’ve no idea what hole
you’re talking about.
Oh! What hole?
What hole are we talking about?
[speaking Danish]
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
The whole thing is burnt.
I think it’s just the heat too high.
I tried to reduce it
but it’s just not working for me.
I’m gonna have
to put the apple in somehow.
I’m just gonna have to spoon it in
afterwards. They will never know. Ouch.
I think I’ve lost some batter and now
they just look very, very small.
They’re really cool. Having never
seen one before, I’m thrilled.
[Sandi] Come at a bad time?
Yes. Maybe, but that’s fine.
We’re trying to make you proud, Sandi.
-Very good.
-Doing our best.
I have no time for this nonsense.
Bakers, you have five minutes left.
There’s only five minutes left
and I have to finish seven of them.
What am I doing? Get in there.
I’ve got eight and how many
do we need? Fourteen?
My Æbleskiver are made.
So I’m just sieving through
my jam so it’s super smooth.
Oh, it won’t even get in there now.
It’s literally horrible.
Going everywhere. Burnt.
Bakers, you have one minute.
That’s not the best. They’re definitely
not what Sandi was looking for.
Thank God I had a decent Signature, eh?
Bakers, that is the end.
Your time is up.
They’re not looking good.
Please bring your Æbleskiver and place
them behind your photograph on the table.
[Noel] Prue and Paul are expecting 14
perfect Æbleskiver.
Spheres of light batter,
filled with cinnamon spiced apple,
accompanied by a strawberry
jam dipping sauce.
Interesting.
Right, shall we start with this one?
[Prue] Mmm-hmm.
Hang on a minute.
-Yes.
-Hang on a minute.
Now these look as if they’ve
been torn open to be filled...
-They have.
-...like doughnuts, you know?
Cutting it and putting
apple in is not the way.
It’s a bit stodgy.
Someone struggled really rotating them.
Hmm. Very nice cinnamon flavour though,
and apple.
But the sauce is not a dipping sauce.
Yeah, this is a bit too thick.
It's a shame.
Now moving on, these look a bit neater.
There’s the apple filling.
Quite chunky apples, which I don't really
mind that much, to be honest.
It’s good dipping sauce though.
They’re pretty good. It’s quite aerated
as you can see from inside.
Hmm. Just the right texture.
[Paul] Hmm. You’ve got a bit of bite
there, haven’t you?
Look at the colour, the colour difference.
[Prue] Yeah. They’re not a perfect set.
They’re not.
So if we go for one in the middle.
Little bit of aeration.
Got a lot of apple in there actually.
Bit stodgy inside.
I like the amount of filling though.
It’s rather good.
The strawberry dipping sauce
isn’t too bad at all.
These have had serious issues.
It’s split. This is to do with the heat.
What’s happened with this is it’s browned
very quickly without the batter cooking.
Yeah. You can taste the
burnt on that as well.
It’s very like a burnt pan... Pancake.
Moving onto our last one.
Bit of a difference here in size. Um...
Yeah. Yeah that one is walnut-sized one.
Loads of apple in there, Prue.
It’s aerated enough, I just think they
struggled with, with the... Again,
with the temperature
and the consistency. Okay.
[Sandi] Prue and Paul will now rate the
Æbleskiver from best to worst.
In 5th and last place are these.
Rahul, you can taste the burntness.
Unlucky.
Yeah.
In 4th place is this one.
Manon, they were sort of all
different sizes, but they tasted good.
In 3rd place is this one.
They were a little bit stodgy,
but the overall appearance is better
than the other two.
Okay.
However, cutting them with a knife
and filling them with a bit of apple sauce
I could not understand what hole
you were talking about,
so I was just, like, just get it in there.
So in 2nd place is...this one.
Kim-Joy, um, they were nice and even.
Really they were a pretty good shot at it.
Which means in 1st place.
Obviously, you've got a nice bit of
aeration there,
a good bit of apple in there as well.
The sauce is good. Well done.
Thanks, Paul. Thank you.
Yay!
[laughs]
It can be as stodgy all as it likes,
I mean it got me third place.
I didn't, I didn’t come last.
It’s really bad.
[Noel] One last challenge.
A final chance for the bakers to earn
their place in the tent
and to claim Star Baker.
Can I just say,
I've loved having Danish Week.
Can I just say for the record, why aren’t
we having a Halloween Week?
You know, Horror Week?
‘Cause, you know, we’ve had Danish Week.
Every week that we look at you, darling,
every week.
I think maybe one week we
maybe do a Goth Week.
Goth Week? Surely?
-I think Goth Week.
-Black fairy cakes.
So all five bakers turned up yesterday,
hilarious Hawaiian shirts,
very jolly and I think suddenly
reality actually set in.
Yeah, it’s semi-finals next week.
We have to be slightly harder.
It’s tight, isn’t it?
I mean, we’re talking about...
[Paul] It is very, very close.
I mean, Ruby and Kim-Joy are both in
the Star Baker position at the moment.
So Briony in the middle?
Briony’s one of those people that could
leave or could be Star Baker.
It’s a bit up and down.
Manon is a very French baker.
Look at that bread she made.
That bread if it was French Week,
was perfect, but it wasn't right.
And Rahul, funny...
Oddly is in a little bit of danger.
[Paul] But I think he’s,
he’s run out of confidence.
He got hit hard
for the first time yesterday,
where we were
quite critical about his baking.
Genuinely, I do not know today
who's gonna get the crown
and who’s gonna go home.
No. None of us do.
Hello bakers, welcome back to the tent.
For your Showstopper challenge today,
Paul and Prue would like you to make
kagemand or kagekone.
Kagemand or kagekone is a cake
traditionally served
at a birthday celebration in Denmark.
So the cake is shaped like a boy
or a girl, and the best bit is
that the whole party is supposed to scream
when the head gets cut off.
Oh, I love that. [gurgles]
[all laughing]
Okay, your kagemand
must be perfectly baked
using yeasted Danish pastry,
and must be intricately decorated.
And as if that wasn't enough, your
decoration needs to include at least three
different confectionery making skills.
You have four and a half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
Bake.
The bakers must make their kagemand
or kagekone
in the form of somebody recognisable
to them,
give or take a little artistic licence.
And just as they do in Denmark,
create it from delicious Danish pastries.
What I would like to see is Danish pastry
that is actually filled and then glazed
so that it’s a little bit shiny.
So shiny, delicious, sweeties on top...
Mmm, lovely.
You want a golden flaky pastry,
beautiful and soft inside
and luxurious buttered layers.
I think Danish pastry’s a great way
to test the bakers.
They have to get that Danish pastry right.
[Noel] To be master of their
Danish pastry,
the bakers must achieve
perfect lamination...
It’s pretty satisfying.
[Noel] ...the creation of delicate layers
of butter within the dough.
And et voilà!
So you want to keep the butter as cold
as possible for this to work
‘cause if not then it all melts out.
[Sandi] Over the next few hours...
Oh, it’s just taking ages.
[Sandi] ...the bakers must repeatedly
roll, fold and chill
to create a perfect dough,
which in a searing tent...
I’m so hot.
[Sandi] ...will be easier said than done.
That’s just one fold done. One of four.
-Good morning.
-Hello, Briony.
What about your birthday cake?
So, I’m doing my Nana Pat as she’s an
amazing woman.
She’s 93. Still touches her toes
every morning and she...
-I can't do that now.
-I know. Neither can I. Um...
-Is this her in the pictures?
-this is her. Yeah, sorry, this is her
on her wedding day in 1948.
-[Prue] She looks lovely.
-But I’m doing her in the 1940s.
-Nice square shoulders.
-Yes. Nice square shoulders.
Nice nipped-in waist with her belt.
She was just very glam
and she still is a very cool lady.
[Noel] Nana Pat will be accessorised
with toffee heels and a sherbet handbag.
Briony’s traditional Danish swirls
will have a novel filling of blueberries
with a ginger crème patissiere.
Nana Pat has tried this.
She gave me the big thumbs up.
She’s just amazing. Still drives.
Oh, my God. Look, it’s literally walking.
If you got through to the semis
would you be really excited?
Yeah. Yeah. Mega excited.
Imagine getting through to the final?
Oh, my God. I can’t even think about it.
I mean, I’m not sure
I’m even getting through to the final.
[laughing]
It’s touch and go for me.
So I’m doing kagekone, I think they
call it, and that is my sister.
She was a gorgeous child.
And, um, there’s a picture of her
at my brother’s birthday and they looked
like they were having
the most amount of fun,
so it’s modelled on, on her.
[Sandi] To make sister
Nic picture perfect,
Ruby is assembling her Danish by Danish
and covering each one with a neat circle
of marzipan
before adding her confectionery clothes.
The marzipan’s just sitting on top
of the frangipane Danish?
Yeah.
Will you be able to see the Danish?
No. I can show some of it if it needs to.
Don't let him put you off.
I’m trying to not let him get in my head.
He’s making me...
Look at me. Look at me.
-...doubt everything again.
-Ignore. Ignore.
-Yeah. No. Just...
-Look at me. I’ve got you.
-Good. Good.
-Good luck.
He’s not doing that to me today.
Marshmallows. Whoa.
I’m gonna be sticky. I’m so sticky.
I’m just making my marshmallow.
Hopefully. Looks a little bit runny
at the minute, but we’ll see how it goes.
[Noel] This Showstopper’s been designed
to test a whole range of skills.
It’s gone quite gelatinous. It’s no good.
[Noel] To earn a place in the semi-final,
the bakers must produce more individual
elements than ever before.
Ouch. I can’t afford to lose
any single minute today.
So many things that you really want
to get right today. Basically everything.
I believe in you.
You know like... Have you seen Star Wars?
No.
You’re Luke Skywalker now and I’m Yoda.
-What are you talking about?
-Strong in the baking, are you?
-Who is Luke Sidewalker?
-Have you seen... Who? Luke who?
-Luke what? Sky?
-Skywalker.
No, I don't know.
He’s a Jedi. You were too busy
probably studying science,
while I was pretending to be a Jedi.
Rahul may not want to be a Jedi ,
but today he will be the King of India,
bejewelled with fruit jellies
and handmade chocolates
on top of his traditional Danish.
So basically twisted knots and then fill
it with crème pat
and then this whole thing will be covered
with marzipan,
and then I’m gonna put
a layer of buttercream.
-[Sandi] Wow.
-Hang on,
on top of the Danish pastry,
which is gonna be crispy,
you’re covering the whole...
That with buttercream?
The only reason being sometimes
because of the Danish shape
it can be a little bit up and down.
Remember, celebrate the Danish.
[Noel] One baker is celebrating
their Danish by stripping it right back.
I’m actually going for quite
a plain Danish pastry.
I don't like... I just like to eat
just the pastry on its own.
So that’s why I just wanted
to do plain croissant.
Okay, I think it’s gonna be enough.
[Sandi] Manon’s recreating
her friend Stina.
She’s going above and beyond,
decorating with four
types of confectionery
and showing off her
French patisserie skills
by adding pain au chocolat arms and legs.
What butter are you using?
So I’m using Danish butter. Yes.
Why do you look like that, Paul?
It’s not a go to butter professionally
that you’d use. Ever. It’s French.
You should have gone French...
-Really?
-...with the butter. Yeah.
It has a higher melting temperature.
So when you’re developing the dough...
-Okay.
-...they don't melt as much.
Can I just say, Paul, this is no time
to tell her this. She has made her pastry.
Yeah.
I’ll just do this really quickly.
I know it’s really warm in here.
It’s not ideal.
Whoo.
Paul’s gonna be very watchful
over the layers,
over everything,
so you’ve just gotta work quickly
but not to the detriment
of the dough, really.
I need to relax. I’m so stressed.
[sighs]
I don't know what I’m doing now.
Hang on a minute.
So this is my crystallised ginger,
which I’m putting into the honeycomb.
Honeycomb covered in chocolate is one
of my sister’s favourite, um, chocolates.
[Sandi] With half the bake gone
and time of the essence,
the bakers must decide where
to focus their energies.
While Ruby, Manon and Rahul
are concentrating on their sweets...
I’ve got white chocolate for my ganache.
[exhales]
Chocolate rain.
[Sandi] ...Briony and Kim-Joy
are prioritising decoration.
I’m not gonna lie. It’s not an exact
representation of Nana Pat.
Can’t mess it up otherwise Charlotte will
go, "Why did you make my face like that?
Oh, she’s starting to come to life?
Yes, she’s a living, living lady.
Oh, look at that face. It’s gorgeous
It's quite creepy.
Do you paint?
It is a little on the creepy side.
In real life Kim-Joy’s friend Charlotte
isn’t at all creepy,
she’s an opera buff and will be dressed
to impress in an elegant ball gown.
I like intricate stuff.
I like being able to take my time over it.
What is this bit then?
So this... I’m just doing her skirt...
-Right.
-...and her top.
So I’m just putting on the base
and putting little roses on it.
Okay. I’m being very stupid,
is this cooked already?
-This, this is just marzipan.
-Oh, it’s marzipan.
Okay. Looked like very underdone dough.
Can you tell how much I’ve learnt
in the time I’ve spent in the tent?
Yes. Yes. I can tell. You are... Yeah.
What are you doing in there?
Sorting out my truffles.
That one’s a bit sad, isn’t he?
Which one? This one?
Yeah... No, the one at the back.
It’s a bit small.
Yeah, it’s a little, little baby one.
Is it? Is he gonna like that, Paul,
they’re not the same size?
It is a competition. He is the judge.
-It’s up to you though. Go your own way.
-Fine.
What you doing?
Just making them all a bit smaller.
Don't listen to me.
You got in my head!
Bakers, you have two hours left!
Doomed.
-Do you want a bit of herring?
-Hmm?
Herring? Do you want some herring?
I’ve got something stuck in my teeth.
Okay, so I just need to think,
because obviously I need to have
enough dough for all of it.
Oh, as you can see I am
a little bit stressed.
[Sandi] Ready or not, the bakers must
now shape their Danishes...
I’m gonna turn this into twisted knots.
One leg.
[Sandi] ...to ensure they don't run out
of time for proving, baking and cooling.
I’m just really conscious that I want them
to be nice tight rolls.
So these bigger ones will be more so for
the body.
I should... I think I need about 17.
I’d make, um, one head.
Obviously. Humans have one head.
Yes, I really don't want to make
the head too big
'cause it is gonna rise.
Just doing Nana Pat’s hair.
Oh, gone way too big.
[laughs]
I just need to finish
it as soon as possible
because I actually need to prove it.
[Noel] The bakers
face a critical decision,
how long to prove their dough?
If it’s not given long enough,
the pastry will be too heavy and dense.
Too long and they risk
the butter leaking out.
I’m probably gonna give 'em half hour.
They haven’t got much time.
That looks like Operation.
Do you know Operation? The game?
The game. Ah, yes.
We call it, uh, Docteur Maboul.
-What’s that mean?
-That means "crazy doctor."
-Crazy doctor?
-Yes.
God, I’m so hot.
I just wonder if I should just,
you know, bake it.
It’s just so hot in here and...
Yeah, I think I should just bake it.
[Sandi] Kim-Joy’s friend has been
proving for 15 minutes.
It’s so hot in here,
I’m already gonna lose lamination.
I’m just gonna bake it now.
I’m just filling my chocolate bonbons
and then I’m gonna put it
in the freezer for a little bit.
Tastes like sherbet.
[coughs]
Once this is done, I had made
my marshmallow,
my caramel. I only have to do
my chocolate and my nougatine.
[exhales]
Nana Pat is in.
Don't move. Don't move. Please don't
move. Please don't move. Oh, okay.
So they’re going in now for 15 minutes.
[Noel] Danish pastry requires
a short bake.
In a matter of minutes
the bakers will know
if their hours of tireless
work have been in vain.
You kinda don't want it to brown too much
on the outside
but you want it to cook nicely on
the inside so you’ve gotta be careful.
They look really flaky and puffy.
Look, there’s lots of butter leaking.
Oh, dear me.
The pain au chocolat
has opened a little bit.
A lot of pressure.
Okay.
It looks really flaky and gigantic.
Um, it’s not as, it’s not as delicate
and small as I thought it would be.
Just gotta, um, make it work.
[grunts]
-I haven’t even got a sword.
-Well, that’s not my fault. Ah!
-Ooh. Ooh.
-Do the time call.
-Bakers...
-[whispers] One hour.
...you’ve got one hour left.
And you’ve got less.
I’m loving this week. I’m loving it.
I’m gonna open the door.
These are looking good. Maybe a little bit
crispy round the outside but...
Yeah I’m happy with those.
Lovely, lovely lamination.
It’s a nice colour. It’s a nice golden
brown so happy with that.
I think this has risen in a weird way.
It’s crispy on the top
but very bready inside.
I’m just worried it’s still gonna
be a bit doughy inside.
Come on, Manon. Ah. Tiny bit more.
Like, two minutes. Come on. Last effort.
Gonna wait till it’s risen.
The main thing is that it’s out and
it’s cooked and I like it and it’s good.
We’ll just cover it with raspberries
on the top
and, you know, it’ll all be distracted.
I’m gonna put it for another five minutes
and then I’m just gonna take it out.
-Can I taste this bit?
-Yeah, yeah, yeah.
-Are you sure?
-Go for it. That bit's
probably a bit crunchy but... But yeah.
Mmm. That is delicious.
-Good. Good.
-Wow. Come on.
Smells like something’s burning.
Oh, no. Oh.
It's done.
Tried your best and that’s it.
Okay. Bread is coming out.
[voice quivers nervously]
Bakers, you have 15 minutes,
just 15 minutes.
Go. Go. Go.
Shoo. Shoo. Shoo. Shoo. Shoo.
Okay.
[Rahul] This is the leg.
It’s hard to make a big
slab of pastry look good.
Victory rolls have gone a bit wonky.
Ta-dah!
We’ve got this, okay?
Oh, wow. Great. It’s not gonna work
how I want to work,
but I’ll just have to do it now,
in whichever way I can.
Well, it’s not as good
as I wanted it to look.
The braid is just... Yeah, just need to
arrange things cleverly.
She likes to wear a lot of bright colours.
Believe or not I’m actually
the quietest in my house.
Beautiful.
It’s the two hands of the maharajah.
I like fresh raspberries.
Yeah, all right, she’s coming together,
she’s coming together.
Oh, dear me. My hands are shaking so bad.
I can’t even bloody cut.
Bakers, you have five minutes left.
Uh... Bah.
Scissors? Scissors? Scissors?
Scissors? Scissors anywhere?
Belt. Face. Bag.
Ooh, toffee, toffee, toffee.
After this I’m going home.
Breaking it into pieces
‘cause it will sit on my skirt.
Ah, yes. That was so satisfying.
I’m not sure how proud she’d be of this
pearl necklace, but she’s getting it.
These are with raspberry jam.
I guess they look like feet,
really, don't they?
Maybe I should keep them as feet?
Doesn’t really look that good. That’s it.
Right, bakers, your time is up.
Please place your Showstoppers
at the end of your workstations.
It’s rubbish but it’s okay.
[Sandi] The bakers’ Danish Showstoppers
now face the judgement of Paul and Prue.
Ruby, please bring up your kagekone.
And this is your sister?
This is my sister when she was younger.
She’s got a very fun, bubbly personality.
-It’s absolutely sweet.
-Oh.
It really is.
[Paul] Danish pastries
looks like Danish pastries.
See the layers,
how tight they are together.
There’s butter still in there.
It’s crispy on the outside. If you’d
glazed it, it would have been nicer.
Oh, really?
[Paul] With apricot jam.
[Ruby] Apricot jam?
[Prue] Apricot jam.
[Ruby] Right, okay. Fine.
I think the pastry’s lovely, but Paul is
right about the apricot glaze.
-Not just for its look...
-Yeah, for the taste.
...but because you need a little
bit more sweetness in it.
Okay.
But it’s buttery.
I can feel that on my tongue.
-Hmm, yeah.
-You have your honeycomb.
Hmm, hmm.
-Yeah the ginger works.
-That’s delicious.
Thank you.
Overall I think it’s really nice.
I think the design’s effective.
-It’s really nice.
-Yeah, simple and effective.
[Prue] I must say,
I think the way that you’ve
done the skirt with the plaiting
of the marshmallow
and the face and the bow on top is
all beautifully done. Lovely.
So what filling have you put
inside your Danish?
So I just have a bar of chocolate
and the rest is just plain.
I like it plain.
Hmm, is that a Danish
or is that a pain au chocolat?
One, two, three.
[all] Ahhh!
[all laughing]
It is a little undercooked in the middle
and overcooked on the outside.
[Paul] Your oven was too high and you kept
it in there for too long.
The first thing that happens
in a Danish pastry
is butter leaks away from the Danish,
soaks onto the tray, gets drawn up from
the bottom of the pastry
and then that flashes with the heat.
And it fries at the bottom.
The bottom fries.
Yeah. So that’s, that’s
what’s happened there.
And it’s not just happened on this,
it’s happened on all of them.
Hmm.
I mean that’s been sitting in a pool
of butter and now it’s solidified.
It’s congealed. Mmm.
And these chocolates.
Hmm. It’s good.
The sweets are very, very good.
Very professional looking, actually.
Your pastry, however,
I have a big issue with.
I think your baking was,
was pretty poor on this.
I don't think I’ve ever
seen more exquisite piping.
-Thank you.
-It’s amazing.
Um, so it represents my friend Charlotte
and it’s her wearing, like, a gown.
The design of it is impeccable.
I mean it’s very, very good.
However, for me, you’ve had issues
with the butter. It’s all gone.
Yeah.
It’s dry. You see the big gaps?
That’s where the butter’s gone.
Ah.
So what you’re left
with is just the dough.
It’s definitely, sort of,
under-baked or soggy.
You’ve under-proved this thing.
I think I worried that, um,
it was quite warm
so the butter might be getting
too warm, so I baked it sooner.
Hmm.
-Shall we do the other filling? This one.
-Hmm.
What have you got in that, um...
Is that crème pat?
-Mmm-hmm.
-What’s in there?
Um, with...
Almond liqueur crème pat?
[crying]
It’s okay. It’s okay.
It’s very nice and strong.
I love that.
Marzipan’s good. Chocolate’s good.
The jellies are nice. The pastry not so.
Mmm-hmm.
Thank you, Kim-Joy.
-Thank you very much.
-Can I help you?
Let me help you.
[whispering]
It’s okay, sweet. It’s all right.
You did great. Looks beautiful.
I’m good now. I’m fine.
Just let it out.
In the Danish pastries you’ve got ginger
crème pat with some dried blueberries.
And then it’s got vanilla marzipan
and then there’s some sherbet.
And some toffee on her shoes at the bottom
and a marshmallow necklace as well.
It’s not a beard. It’s a necklace.
-It’s got a lovely flavour.
-Oh, good.
Quite like the blueberries in there
and the colour’s nice.
See the colour, that’s the colour
you’re looking for.
-Good.
-And this is sherbet, is it?
Yes that’s sherbet on the bag, yep.
[Briony laughs]
-It is, yeah.
-It’s good, isn’t it?
Overall, it’s got a nice flavour.
You’re the closest one
to get the Danish pastries.
It’s just burnt. You left it in the oven
ten minutes too long.
Probably yeah, just yeah.
But I love the way you’ve used the round
ones for the buttons
and it looks positively
Indian and jewelled.
Uh-oh, here we go. Are you ready?
[all] Ahhh!
Bring this over.
It’s tough.
Very dry. Really dry.
Um, marzipan’s lovely.
-Very nice.
-It’s got a nice flavour.
-[Prue] Shall we have a jelly sweet?
-Yeah.
-Perfect. Ooh, yeah.
-Very nice.
And that one is summer mixed berry.
That’s nice, too.
And the hard buttons are basically,
uh, filled with raspberry jam.
Mmm.
-Well, I love all your sweets.
-Yeah.
-The pastry is a bit disappointing.
-Thank you, Rahul.
-Yeah, thank you.
I need a hug. I’m going home today now.
-Stop saying that.
-Everyone’s the same.
No, no, no, Rahul.
Don't say that yet, okay?
I don't deserve to be here any more
so I just need to be kicked out.
I don't know if I can talk about it. Um...
It’s fine. [sniffles]
There’s been a lot of movement,
hasn't there?
I mean, in terms of the rankings?
I think some did better than others.
I think Briony’s picked herself back up.
I also think Ruby’s done well.
I think Kim-Joy’s slipped down
in contention of leaving,
as well as Manon and Rahul
are in serious trouble.
In trouble.
Yes, I mean Manon did spend, for me,
far too much time making beautiful sweets
and not enough time filling her pastry,
which would have made a huge difference.
[Sandi] What about Rahul?
[Paul] He burnt ‘em basically, yeah.
[Prue] If you over-bake the pastry
and all the butter runs out.
I think I know who’s gonna be Star Baker.
We need to talk about that,
but to who’s going home...
-You guys have another cup of tea.
-I’ll put the kettle on.
Yep. I’ve got a bottle of fizz for myself.
[laughs]
Right my lovely bakers,
I have loved Danish Week.
I thought it was great. And I have the
pleasure of announcing the Star Baker.
Now, this is getting harder
and harder I have to tell you,
but there can be only one,
like, there can
only be one mermaid in Copenhagen Harbour.
So the Star Baker this week is...
Ruby.
[all cheering]
-Aw!
-Oh, man!
That means that I’ve got the horrible job
of sending one of you home.
And, um, yeah,
this is gonna be a nightmare.
The person who’s leaving
us this week is...
Manon. I’m sorry.
What?
[crying]
Manon, you know what?
You should be proud of yourself.
I mean, you know,
to get this far is amazing.
I know.
[sighs] It’s gonna be okay.
Oh, Manon.
It’s just baking.
-You did really well, Manon. I’m so sorry.
-Thank you.
Ironically it was on a pain au chocolat.
I’ve learnt so much.
So many things I didn't even thought
I’d be able to actually make.
I’m a stronger and a stronger baker,
and hopefully a stronger person.
I am sad to see Manon go,
she’s a really good French baker.
Just not a very good Danish one.
[Paul] Next week, Rahul.
Start upping it up.
I’ll, I’ll try. I’ll promise you I’ll try.
I didn't expect that.
Just, just, like... Yeah.
-Congratulations.
-Thank you. Thank you.
That sounds so silly in my head that I’m
through to the semi-finals, like, what?
See you next week. Oh, my God.
-Well done, Ruby.
-Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Ruby’s done it. I’m very happy for her.
If there was a time to get Star Baker,
this is when you get it, going into the
semi-finals, it gees you up.
I got Star Baker.
[screaming on phone]
I told you I’m the quiet one.